10.9 Release Notes (#4290)
owncloud/docs: modules/ROOT/pages/server_release_notes.adoc

TIP: If you use the currently existing versions of the ownCloud Clients, you will not yet experience performance gains.

=== Manual File Locking: Ability to Define User Groups that can Unlock Files

Since version 10.5, xref:file-locking-in-the-web-interface[ownCloud supports Manual File Locking] to prevent concurrent changes of files by different users. The feature works in a way that it only allows the users who locked a file to unlock it again (_exclusive file locking_) and it provides a configurable timeout for file locks.

Version 10.9 introduces a new sub-feature that allows administrators to define groups of users that are entitled to unlock locked files, independent of whether they have set the lock initially or not (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38222[#38222]). Users in such groups can regain control over files, e.g., if a lock owner is unavailable and a long timeout for file locks is used. Administrators can find the configuration in the _Manual File Locking_ section of the _General_ admin settings.

=== File Versions: Store and Display the Author of File Versions

TBC

=== Restrict Public Link Sharing to Certain Groups

> In certain scenarios it is not desired that all users of an ownCloud installation can create public links and share data publicly, respectively. To cover for this, ownCloud Server 10.9 comes with a new configuration option for administrators that allows to restrict the creation of public links to users in certain groups (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38980[#38980]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In certain scenarios it is not desired that all users of an ownCloud installation can create public links and share data publicly, respectively. To cover for this, ownCloud Server 10.9 comes with a new configuration option for administrators that allows to restrict the creation of public links to users in certain groups (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38980[#38980]).
```
```suggestion
In certain scenarios it is not desired that all users of an ownCloud installation can create public links and share data publicly, respectively. To cover for this, ownCloud Server 10.9 comes with a new configuration option for administrators that allows restricting the creation of public links to users in certain groups (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38980[#38980]).
```

TIP: Existing public links will continue to work after introducing a restriction policy. The policy only applies to the creation of new public links.

=== Ability to move a user's home folder

> In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows to move user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and takes care of updating all other related information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows to move user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and takes care of updating all other related information.
```
```suggestion
In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows moving user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and takes care of updating all other related information.
```

Administrators can find more information in the LINK[ownCloud documentation].

=== Updated App Versions

Find below a list of updated apps in comparison with the 10.8 complete bundle. More information on the changes can be found in the respective changelogs on ownCloud Marketplace.

* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/web[Web] 4.x.x
* Windows Network Drive 2.1.0

> * TBC

Reviewer 2: * The following app updates are included in 10.9.0beta1:
   - files_mediaviewer : v1.0.5
   - files_pdfviewer : v1.0.1
   - files_texteditor : v2.4.1
   - guests : v0.9.3
   - oauth2 : v0.5.2
   - openidconnect : v2.1.0
   - web : v4.5.0
   - windows_network_drive : v2.1.0
   - wopi : v1.5.1

=== Other Notable Changes

* The handling for inaccessible federated shares has been improved to better avoid removing temporarily unavailable shares. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38474[#38474]

> * Group admins can now add users to their groups via the HTTP Provisioning API (previously this was only possible via the web-based user management). https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39013[#39013]

Reviewer: This is a bit tricky to describe - subadmins cannot add just any user to a group that they administer.
If the subadmin administers groups groupA, groupB and groupC, if Brian is already a member of groupA then the subadmin can also make Brian a member of groupB and groupC.

I guess people can read that in the linked PR. I am having trouble thinking of a short edit to this line that will be useful.

Author: Yeah, only those users the group admin "knows of" can be added, true. I tried to make it a bit more precise.

This new server-side capability needs changes in the ownCloud Clients to make use of it. At the time of the ownCloud Server 10.9 release, client implementations for iOS, Android and Desktop are in the making but not yet available. The implementations will follow soon with the next client releases.

TIP: If you use the currently existing versions of the ownCloud Clients, you will not yet experience performance gains.

=== Manual File Locking: Ability to Define User Groups that can Unlock Files

Since version 10.5, xref:file-locking-in-the-web-interface[ownCloud supports Manual File Locking] to prevent concurrent changes of files by different users. The feature works in a way that it only allows the users who locked a file to unlock it again (_exclusive file locking_) and it provides a configurable timeout for file locks.

> Version 10.9 introduces a new sub-feature that allows administrators to define groups of users that are entitled to unlock locked files, independent of whether they have set the lock initially or not (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38222[#38222]). Users in such groups can regain control over files, e.g., if a lock owner is unavailable and a long timeout for file locks is used. Administrators can find the configuration in the _Manual File Locking_ section of the _General_ admin settings.

Reviewer 3: FYI, the feature is documented in (admin and user manual):
https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.9/admin_manual/configuration/files/manual_file_locking.html
https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.9/user_manual/files/manual_file_locking.html

> Version 10.9 introduces a new subfeature that allows administrators to define groups of users that are entitled to unlock locked files, independent of whether they have set the lock initially or not (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38222[#38222]). Users in such groups can regain control over files, e.g., if a lock owner is unavailable and a long timeout for file locks is used. Administrators can configure this in the _Manual File Locking_ section of the _General_ admin settings. More information, refer to the https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.9/admin_manual/configuration/files/manual_file_locking.html[ownCloud documentation].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Version 10.9 introduces a new subfeature that allows administrators to define groups of users that are entitled to unlock locked files, independent of whether they have set the lock initially or not (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38222[#38222]). Users in such groups can regain control over files, e.g., if a lock owner is unavailable and a long timeout for file locks is used. Administrators can configure this in the _Manual File Locking_ section of the _General_ admin settings. More information, refer to the https://doc.owncloud.com/server/latest/admin_manual/configuration/files/manual_file_locking.html[ownCloud documentation].
```

TIP: This feature is incompatible with S3 Object storage. Do not enable it if you're using S3 as a primary storage.

=== Restrict Public Link Sharing to Certain Groups

In certain scenarios it is not desired that all users of an ownCloud installation can create public links and share data publicly, respectively. To cover for this, ownCloud Server 10.9 comes with a new configuration option for administrators that allows restricting the creation of public links to users in certain groups (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38980[#38980]).

TIP: Existing public links will continue to work after introducing a restriction policy. The policy only applies to the creation of new public links.

=== Ability to move a user's home folder

In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows moving user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and takes care of updating all other related information.

> Administrators can find more information in the LINK[ownCloud documentation].

Reviewer 3: FYI, the feature is documented at:
https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.9/admin_manual/configuration/user/user_management.html
https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.9/admin_manual/configuration/server/occ_command.html#user-commands

Note the related new `user:home` commands which are described at the same location

> In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows moving user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and of updating all other related information. In addition, a new command `occ user:home` lists the storage locations of users.

Reviewer: `occ user:home` by itself is not a working command. The two commands are:
`occ user:home:list-dirs`
`occ user:home:list-users`

Maybe some words here should be changed, or is the current text enough for summary release notes?

> In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows moving user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and of updating all other related information. In addition, a new command `occ user:home` lists the storage locations of users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some cases it is necessary to manage storage locations of users, e.g., if you want to distribute them across multiple storages. To facilitate this process, Server 10.9 introduces a new _occ_ command (`occ user:move-home`) that allows moving user home folders to a new location (https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39136[#39136]). The command takes care of moving the physical data and of updating all other related information. In addition, new commands like the `occ user:home:list-dirs` which lists the available storage locations of users and `occ user:home:list-users` which lists users belonging to a storage location have been added.
```

> For more information, refer to the https://doc.owncloud.com/server/latest/admin_manual/configuration/server/occ_command.html#user-commands[ownCloud documentation about occ] and https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.9/admin_manual/configuration/user/user_management.html#moving-the-user-home[about user management].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to the https://doc.owncloud.com/server/latest/admin_manual/configuration/server/occ_command.html#user-commands[ownCloud documentation about occ] and https://doc.owncloud.com/server/latest/admin_manual/configuration/user/user_management.html#moving-the-user-home[about user management].
```

=== Updated App Versions

Find below a list of updated apps in comparison with the 10.8 complete bundle. More information on the changes can be found in the respective changelogs on ownCloud Marketplace.

* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/files_mediaviewer[Media Viewer] 1.0.5
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/files_pdfviewer[PDF Viewer] 1.0.1
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/files_texteditor[Text Editor] 2.4.1
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/guests[Guests] 0.9.3
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/oauth2[OAuth2] 0.5.2
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/openidconnect[OpenID Connect] 2.1.0
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/web[Web] 4.6.0
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/windows_network_drive[Windows Network Drive] 2.1.0
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/wopi[Microsoft Office Online] 1.5.1
* https://marketplace.owncloud.com/apps/user_ldap[LDAP Integration] 0.16.0

=== Other Notable Changes

> * The handling for inaccessible federated shares has been improved to better avoid removing temporarily unavailable shares. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38474[#38474]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The handling of inaccessible federated shares has been improved to avoid removing temporarily unavailable shares. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/38474[#38474]
```

* Group admins can now add users who are in at least one of their administered groups to their other groups via the HTTP Provisioning API (previously this was only possible via the web-based user management). https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39013[#39013]

> * Issues with updating apps via the Market app under certain circumstances have been resolved. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39108[#39108]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Issues with updating apps via the Market app occurring under certain circumstances have been resolved. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39108[#39108]
```

* The logo on the login screen will be displayed correctly again, independent of its size. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39129[#39129]
* Image orientation information from EXIF data will now be processed correctly so that images will be displayed with the correct orientation, e.g., in the Media Viewer. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39140[#39140]
* The `occ user:report` command has been fixed so that only real user folders will be counted (instead of counting system folders like, e.g., avatars). Additionally, folders outside of the data directory will also be taken into account (e.g., symlinks). https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39223[#39223] https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39254[#39254]

> * The "Home" icon in the breadcrumb of the Files app has been replaced with the icon and text of the respective view (e.g., All Files, Deleted Files) so that its functionality is more clear to the user. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39367[#39367]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The "Home" icon in the breadcrumb of the Files app has been replaced with the icon and text of the respective view (e.g., All Files, Deleted Files) so that its functionality is clearer to the user. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39367[#39367]
```

* The `occ user:list` command now supports the option `show-all-attributes` to provide a user list including all available information at once. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39366[#39366]

> * The "Open with" menu which is shown when a user has can choose between multiple applications/actions for a certain file type (e.g., ONLYOFFICE, Collabora Online, PDF Viewer) has been improved to only show relevant actions. If there's only one relevant action available, clicking on the file name will directly conduct this action. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39541[#39358]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The "Open with" menu which is shown when a user can choose between multiple applications/actions for a certain file type (e.g., ONLYOFFICE, Collabora Online, PDF Viewer) has been improved to only show relevant actions. If there's only one relevant action available, clicking on the file name will directly conduct this action. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39541[#39358]
```

> * Support for Collabora Online Draw has been added https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39594[#39594]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Support for Collabora Online Draw has been added. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39594[#39594]
```

* Thumbnails for WEBP files can now be generated. https://github.com/owncloud/core/issues/39358[#39358]

> * The quality of preview images (e.g., in the Media Viewer) can now be configured https://github.com/owncloud/core/blob/master/config/config.sample.php#L996[in _config.php_]. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39349[#39349]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The quality of preview images (e.g., in the Media Viewer) can now be configured. https://github.com/owncloud/core/blob/master/config/config.sample.php#L996[in _config.php_]. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39349[#39349]
```

* Starting and trailing spaces in file names will now be trimmed when uploading, creating and renaming files in order to maintain cross-platform compatibility (e.g., Windows does not support such file names). https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39310[#39310]
* Empty folders can now be uploaded via the web interface. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39285[#39285]
* The file list has received improvements for mobile devices. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39233[#39233] https://github.com/owncloud/core/issues/39221[#39221]
* The _Shared by link_ view has been improved for mobile devices. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39232[#39232]
* The _Deleted files_ view has been improved for mobile devices. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39236[#39236]
* The file creation menu ("+" menu) now provides buttons to confirm and cancel file creation.  https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39056[#39056]

> * The group listing of the user management in the web interface has been improved in regards of usability. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39262[#39262]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The group listing of the user management in the web interface has been improved with regard to usability. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39262[#39262]
```

* File actions in the web interface will now only be triggered when clicking on the file name. A bug has been fixed that caused clicking on the file row to have the same behavior. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39361[#39361]
* The setting `allow_user_to_change_mail_address` has been introduced and decoupled from the setting `allow_user_to_change_display_name`.
* The expiration date in the _Shared by link_ view will now be correctly displayed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39238[#39238]

=== For developers

* It is now possible to register multiple default actions for a certain mimetype. If there is only a single action available, this action will be conducted when the user clicks on the file name. If there are multiple actions available for a certain mimetype, the user will see an "Open with" menu when clicking on the file name. More information can be found in the https://doc.owncloud.com/server/10.8/developer_manual/app/fundamentals/js.html#registering-file-actions[developer documentation]. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/39541[#39541]

=== Solved known issues

> All xref:server_release_notes.adoc#known-issues[known issues from Server 10.8] have been fixed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All xref:server_release_notes.adoc#known-issues[known issues in Server 10.8] have been fixed.
```

* Bugfix: Avoid potential open_basedir errors after upgrade to PHP 7.4.21 https://github.com/owncloud/core/issues/39034[#39034]

> === Known issues

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
=== Known Issues
```
